David Baas
Professor Gabriele Gottlieb
HST 319
September 26, 2018
Reading Assignment 5
Chapter one talked about the causes and motivations of modern-day human trafficking. As described in the chapter, modern-day human trafficking is caused by a variety of factors. Globalization has created the culture of consumerism we have today with the primary motivation to find a product for the lowest price. This leads many producers in developing countries to cut cost in labor and go towards slave labor. Globalization has driven migration from poor rural areas to cities where traffickers linger to lure victims in with false promises. Globalization has given traffickers more lines of communication and decreased border security allowing for complex international operations to take place. Globalization has also led to international income inequality driving people into poverty and leaving them vulnerable to exploitation. 
In addition to globalization, conflict throughout the world has also driven human trafficking. People living in areas of conflict are in constant danger with no state there to protect them from perpetrators swooping in to take advantage of the situation. Still those who become refugees often become stateless leading to a similar result of no state being there to protect them from perpetrators.  Still in other parts of the world, gender and ethnic discrimination drive people to be vulnerable. Women and minorities across the developing world often have less rights. This leaves them with less opportunity to advance and forces them into industries where trafficking rates are high.  
The first issue that needed further discussion was the difference between a push factor and a pull factor. A push factor is a factor that drives people away from their home. These are factors such as poor living conditions at home and lack of resources in one’s area. A pull factors are factors that draw people to a certain place such as high labor demand or the perception that the location has better opportunity than where one is currently living. All of the causes discussed in the book fit into one of these two categories. It’s important to make that categorization when talking about causes of human trafficking. The second issued that needed further discussion was the topic of globalization. Globalization is often thought of as a good thing for society, but it has had some nasty side effects. The wealth generated by globalization hasn’t been distributed as evenly as needed to eliminate poverty. Poverty as discussed time and again is the defining factor in who is vulnerable to being trafficked. Future endeavors in globalization need to have a focus on uplifting those from poverty to help reduce vulnerability.  
In chapter two, the book talked about effects of human trafficking and what cost it has on individuals and society as a whole. The first consequence talked about were those on the individuals trafficked. In all forms of human trafficking the victim often suffers severe psychological damage that often inhibited the victim from functioning in society. These effects are often permanent. Victims also suffered physical damage related to what field they are trafficked into. For instance, women trafficked into sex slavery often have their reproductive systems destroyed by abuse leaving them unable to bear children. In addition, they are at high risk to contract HIV/AIDS due to unprotected sex. Still those in forced labor have the potential to be maimed by machines or by the work they are doing often having permeant damage to their bodies. 
While the effect on victims was apparent and brutal the effects on broader society are less apparent but still widespread. Places where people are trafficked from often have unhealthy demographics because entire segments of their population are taken for exploitation. Countries where victims are trafficked to sometimes see an increase in racial outburst due to an increase in illegal migrants into their country. The example given were instances of a right-wing faction in the United States shooting illegal immigrants as they crossed the southern border. The increases in these sentiments are understood when considering the effect trafficking has on labor. Labor trafficking all across the world makes it harder for legitimate businesses paying a workforce to be competitive in the global market. This leads to lower wages for unskilled workers in these competitive markets. It could be derived from this effect that this increases the number of people vulnerable to human trafficking because their wages become untenable. 
In addition to effects on labor and demography, human trafficking has political ramifications. The book described human trafficking as a new form of authoritarianism; one without sanction by the state but with all the effects. This authoritarianism undermines the tenants of democratic societies because those who are trafficked have no basic rights. The work and health regulations of democratic societies are undermined because those who are trafficked have no labor rights and often have no access to healthcare. Those that are freed in a developed democratic society often become a burden to it and often that burden becomes pressure on the victim to return to the situation they were in before being trafficked leaving them vulnerable to trafficking again. In other developing societies, trafficked victims are used to perpetuate conflict through the conscription of victims into rebel armies. 
Lastly, human trafficking has consequences in terms of health. The injuries described on the victims free from trafficking are often a burden on healthcare systems in developed countries. For those in sex slavery, health care is not given to those who contract HIV/AIDS or some other disease. Instead, they are forced to continue work therefore prorogating disease across many customers and those customers across their homelands. 
The first issue that I took away as important from this chapter was how human trafficking affects demographics. As stated before, human trafficking can remove entire segments of a region’s population. This is particularly devastating. With those people gone, the region that lost them is driven further into poverty because there are no longer enough people to work. The region might also have problems with producing new population because a significant portion of the female population is gone. This makes for a cycle of poverty that the region cannot easily get out of making them vulnerable to more exploitation by traffickers. 
The second issue I took away from chapter two was how human trafficking affects labor markets. This is particularly important because of what was said before in this resulting in depressed wages. Human trafficking hurts legitimate industries by forcing employers to cut labor cost by reducing wages and laborers or outright moving production to another country where wages can be competitive with forced labor. Worse still the countries the work is outsourced to are often the countries where labor trafficking is taking place.  This all ties back into the first chapter. A drive for cheap products leads some businesses relocated to countries with high rates of trafficking to start trafficking workers themselves. 
